---
layout: post
title:  "CAIR 2016 Recap"
date:   2016-11-19 2:30:02 -0700
categories: Post
tags: R education 
---

Last week I had the good fortune of attending my first CAIR conference in Los Angeles. No, not the Council on American-Islamic Relations, but the [California
Association for Institutional Research.](http://www.cair.org/) Over 300 administrators, analysts, and enthusiasts decended upon the Millenium Biltmore Hotel
to network, share tips and tricks, and watch a live shoot of ABC's The Catch. 

<!--more-->

From the beginning, however, it was clear R was still relegated to the fringe--R was unconscionably omitted from the "favorite statistics
package" group mingling session. In fact, of the hundred or so odd sessions, three were about R. They were:

* Creating Dashboards of Direct and Indirect SLOs Measures in R (Boosalis, Myhre & Binod)
* R for Everything: Getting, Cleaning, Analyzing, and Visualizing Data (Ranzolin)
* Leveraging the power of regression discontinuity designs for program evaluation: an institutional simulation using R (Orona)

I can't speak for my own, but the first and last presentations were superb. If interested, [I've uploaded my presentation to RPubs here.](http://rpubs.com/daranzolin/cair-2016-slides)
Session description below:

> R is a powerful tool for statistical computing and
graphics. It has, unfortunately, been caricatured as
weird, unforgiving, and applicable only to hardcore
statisticians. The objective of this session is thus
twofold: (1) to demonstrate R's versatility up and
down the data pipeline; and (2) to demonstrate R's
overall accessibility to users who do not have a
computer science background. Towards those ends, I
will narrate a typical R workflow at Scout from start
to finish including scripts, plots, HTML and PDF
reports, and an interactive web application.

It was far from perfect, but I felt good about it on the whole.
